# The excesses of day 25

This directory contains a solution (or set of solutions) for [day 25 of Advent of Code 2017](https://adventofcode.com/2017/day/25), written in C++.

Specifically, it contains a parser for the program specification in "The Halting Problem", combined with several possibilities to run a program:

* `AstExecutor` basically walks the syntax tree of the program to run it.
* `BytecodeExecutor` translates the program into a short bytecode array and runs that, not using the syntax tree at all during execution. It should _a lot_ faster than the `AstExecutor`.
* `JitExecutor` translates the program into AMD64 / x86-64 instructions and runs those directly in-memory. Again faster than the `BytecodeExecutor`. However, this only works for machines using the SysV AMD64 ABI (i.e. Linux and MacOS on AMD64 compatible CPUs)
* For comparison, a utility to translate programs into C code and write it to a file is included. That file can then be compiled with any C compiler.

## Usage

To compile the application, run `./build.sh`

Afterwards, run `build-Release/day25` to get a short help message.

To just get the result, use `build-Release/day25 run real-input bytecode`. This will take the program from the file `real-input` and run it with the bytecode-based runtime (as apposed to `ast`, the tree-walker runtimer).

To benchmark all available runtimes, use `build-Release/day25 benchmark real-input`.

To convert a Program to C sourcecode, use `build-Release/day25 generate-c real-input`. The result will be written to the file `generated-program.c`, can be compiled with `gcc -o generated-program generated-program.c`, and then run with `./generated-program`. It will both run a short benchmark, and output the result for the day.

## File overview

* `CMakeLists.txt` describes the build process for CMake.  
* The `tokenizer`, `parser` and `program` files contain classes related to parsing the turing machine language and representing parsed programs in-memory.
* `executor.cpp` and `executor.hpp` contain the base classes for everything that can run programs directly in-memory (as apposed to generating C source code)
* Any `something_executor` file contains files related to one executor/runtime implementation.
* `jit.hpp` and `jit.cpp` are utilities for creating executable amd64/IA-32E/x86-64/x64 programs in-memory.

## Performance comparison

In a completely unscientific benchmark on my laptop, with the application built in Release mode, the different runtimes compare as follows:
```
$ day25 benchmark real-input
Benchmarking program with all executors...
    Benchmarking with executor ast for 20 seconds.
    Took 20001.3ms for 552200000 steps.
      27608.2 steps/ms
      0.0362212 us/step

    Benchmarking with executor bytecode for 20 seconds.
    Took 20000.3ms for 1587800000 steps.
      79389 steps/ms
      0.0125962 us/step

    Benchmarking with executor jit for 20 seconds.
    Took 20000.3ms for 3493800000 steps.
      174687 steps/ms
      0.00572451 us/step
```
That is, the bytecode executor is about 3x as fast as the AST one, and the JIT is again a bit more than twice as fast as the bytecode executor.  
Given how horrendously bad the code generated by the JIT is, this is unexpectedly good.

## Useful resources

* A description of the SystemV AMD64 ABI (calling conventions): https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions#System_V_AMD64_ABI
* Agner Fog's 'objconv' disassembler: https://www.agner.org/optimize/#objconv
* Skeeto's article on writing a JIT for a toy language: https://nullprogram.com/blog/2015/03/19/
* People claim that https://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/monads_machine_code.html is relevant, too.